Self-Review Exercises
1.1 Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
a) Computers process data under the control of sets of instructions called .
b) The key logical units of the computer are the , , ,
, and .
c) The three types of languages discussed in the chapter are , and
.
d) The programs that translate high-level language programs into machine language are
called .
e) is an operating system for mobile devices based on the Linux kernel and Java.
f) software is generally feature complete, (supposedly) bug free and ready for
use by the community.
g) The Wii Remote, as well as many smartphones, use a(n) which allows the device
to respond to motion.

1.2 Fill in the blanks in each of the following sentences about the Java environment:
a) The command from the JDK executes a Java application.
b) The command from the JDK compiles a Java program.
c) A Java source code file must end with the file extension.
d) When a Java program is compiled, the file produced by the compiler ends with the
file extension.
e) The file produced by the Java compiler contains that are executed by the Java
Virtual Machine

1.3 Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements (based on Section 1.5):
a) Objects enable the design practice of —although they may know how to communicate
with one another across well-defined interfaces, they normally are not allowed
to know how other objects are implemented.
b) Java programmers concentrate on creating , which contain fields and the set
of methods that manipulate those fields and provide services to clients.
c) The process of analyzing and designing a system from an object-oriented point of view
is called .
d) A new class of objects can be created conveniently by —the new class (called
the subclass) starts with the characteristics of an existing class (called the superclass),
possibly customizing them and adding unique characteristics of its own.
e) is a graphical language that allows people who design software systems to use
an industry-standard notation to represent them.
f) The size, shape, color and weight of an object are considered of the object’s
class.

Exercises
1.4 Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
a) The logical unit that receives information from outside the computer for use by the
computer is the .
b) The process of instructing the computer to solve a problem is called .
c) is a type of computer language that uses Englishlike abbreviations for machine-
language instructions.
d) is a logical unit that sends information which has already been processed by
the computer to various devices so that it may be used outside the computer.
e) and are logical units of the computer that retain information.
f) is a logical unit of the computer that performs calculations.
g) is a logical unit of the computer that makes logical decisions.
h) languages are most convenient to the programmer for writing programs
quickly and easily.
i) The only language a computer can directly understand is that computer’s .
j) is a logical unit of the computer that coordinates the activities of all the other
logical units.

1.5 Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
a) is a platform independent programming language that was built with the objective
of allowing programs to be written once and then run on a large variety of electronic
devices without modification.
b) , , and are the names of the three editions of Java that can
be used to build different kinds of applications.
c) is the information-carrying capacity of communication lines, and has rapidly
increased over the years and become more affordable. Its availability is a cornerstone for
building applications that are significantly connected.
d) A(n) is a translator that can convert early assembly-language programs to machine
language with reasonable efficiency

1.6 Fill in the blanks in each of the following statements:
a) Java programs normally go through five phases— , , ,
and .
b) A(n) provides many tools that support the software development process,
such as editors for writing and editing programs, debuggers for locating logic errors in
programs, and many other features.
c) The command java invokes the , which executes Java programs.
d) A(n) is a software application that simulates a computer, but hides the underlying
operating system and hardware from the programs that interact with it.
e) The takes the .class files containing the program’s bytecodes and transfers
them to primary memory.
f) The examines bytecodes to ensure that they’re valid.

1.7 Explain what a just-in-time (JIT) compiler of Java does.
1.8 One of the world’s most common objects is a wrist watch. Discuss how each of the following
terms and concepts applies to the notion of a watch: object, attributes, behaviors, class, inheritance
(consider, for example, an alarm clock), modeling, messages, encapsulation, interface and
information hiding.
